.TH CLISP 1 "31 May 2001"


.SH NAME
clisp \- Common Lisp language interpreter and compiler


.SH SYNOPSIS
.B clisp
[
.B \-h
|
.B \-\-help
]
[
.B \-\-version
]
[
.B \-\-license
]
[
.B \-B
.I lisplibdir
]
[
.B \-M
.I memfile
]
[
.B \-m
.I memsize
]
[
.B \-L
.I language
]
[
.B \-N
.I localedir
]
[
.BI \-E domain
.I encoding
]
[
.B \-q
|
.B \-\-quiet
|
.B \-\-silent
]
[
.B \-interactive-debug
]
[
.B \-w
]
[
.B \-I
]
[
.B \-ansi
]
[
.B \-traditional
]
[
.B \-p
.I packagename
]
[
.B \-C
]
[
.B \-norc
]
[
.B \-i
.IR initfile " ..."
]
[
.B \-c
[
.B \-l
]
.I lispfile
[
.B \-o
.I outputfile
] ...
]
[
.B \-x
.I expression
]
[
.I lispfile
[
.I argument
...
]
]


.SH DESCRIPTION
Invokes the common lisp interpreter and compiler.
Invoked without arguments, executes a read-eval-print loop,
in which expressions are in turn read from standard input, evaluated
by the lisp interpreter, and their results output to standard output.
Invoked with
.BR \-c ,
the specified lisp files are compiled to a bytecode that can be
executed more efficiently.


.SH OPTIONS

.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Displays a help message on how to use
.BR clisp .

.TP
.B \-\-version
Displays the
.B clisp
version number, as given by the function call
.IR "(lisp-implementation-version)" .

.TP
.B \-\-license
Displays a summary of the licensing information, the GNU GPL.

.TP
.BI "\-B " lisplibdir
Specifies the installation directory. This is the directory containing
the linking sets and other data files.
Directory lisplibdir can be changed at run-time using the symbol-macro
.B *lib-directory*.


.TP
.BI "\-M " memfile
Specifies the initial memory image.
This must be a memory dump produced by the
.I saveinitmem
function.

.TP
.BI "\-m " memsize
Sets the amount of memory
.B clisp
tries to grab on startup.
The amount may be given as
.I nnnnnnn
(measured in bytes),
.IB nnnn K
or
.IB nnnn KB
(measured in kilobytes) or
.IB n M
or
.IB n MB
(measured in megabytes).
Default is 2 megabytes.
The argument is constrained above 100 KB.
\-\- This version of
.B clisp
eventually uses the entire
.IR memsize .



.TP
.BI "\-L " language
Specifies the language
.B clisp
uses to communicate with the user. This may be
.BR english .
The language may be changed at run-time using the symbol macro
.B *current-language*.

.TP
.BI "\-N " localedir
Specifies the base directory of locale files.
.B clisp
will search its message catalogs in
.IR localedir / language /LC_MESSAGES/clisp.mo.
The localedir may be changed at run-time using the symbol macro
.B *current-language*.

.TP
.BI \-E "domain encoding"
Specifies the encoding used for a given domain, overriding the default
which depends on the environment variables
.BR LC_ALL ", " LC_CTYPE ", " LANG .
.I domain
can be
.BR file ,
affecting
.BR *default-file-encoding* ,
or
.BR pathname ,
affecting
.BR *pathname-encoding* ,
or
.BR terminal ,
affecting
.BR *terminal-encoding* ,
or
.BR foreign ,
affecting
.BR *foreign-encoding* ,
or
.BR misc ,
affecting
.BR *misc-encoding* .
or
.I blank,
affecting all of the above.
Note that these values cannot be saved in a memory image.
You have to use the init file to set them on startup.

.TP
.BR \-q ", " \-\-quiet ", " \-\-silent
Quiet:
.B clisp
displays no banner at startup and no good-bye message when quitting.

.TP
.B \-interactive-debug
Override the batch mode imposed by
.BR \-c ", " \-x ", and " lispfile
and allow interactive handling of
.I ASSERT
and friends.

.TP
.B \-w
Wait for keypress after program termination.

.TP
.B \-I
Be ILISP friendly. ILISP is an alternative Emacs interface to Common Lisp
systems. With this option,
.B clisp
interacts in a way that ILISP can deal with.
Currently the only effect of this is that unnecessary prompts are not
suppressed.

.TP
.B \-ansi
ANSI CL compliant: comply with the ANSI CL specification
even where CLISP has been traditionally different.
It sets the symbol macro
.I *ansi*
to
.BR t .
See impnotes.html, section "Maximum ANSI CL compliance", for details.

.TP
.B \-traditional
Traditional: reverses the residual effects of
.B \-ansi
in the saved image.

.TP
.BI "\-p " packagename
At startup the value of the variable
.I *package*
will be set to the package named
.IR packagename .
The default is the package which was active when the image was saved, normally
.BR USER ,
or
.B COMMON-LISP-USER
if the option
.B \-a
was specified.

.TP
.B \-C
Compile when load: At startup the value of the variable
.I *load-compiling*
will be set to
.BR t .
Code being
.IR load ed
will then be compiled on the fly. This results in slower loading, but faster
execution.

.TP
.BI "\-norc"
Normally
.B clisp
loads a user run control (RC) file on startup (this happens after the
.BI \-C
option is processed).  The file loaded is
.B _clisprc.lisp
or
.B _clisprc.fas
in the home directory
.IR "(user-homedir-pathname)" ,
whichever is newest. This option,
.B \-norc,
prevents loading of the RC file.

.TP
.BI "\-i " "initfile ..."
Specifies initialization files to be
.IR load ed
at startup. These should be lisp files (source or compiled). Several
.B \-i
options can be given; all the specified files will be loaded in order.

.TP
.BI "\-c " "lispfile ..."
Compiles the specified
.IR lispfile s
to bytecode (*.fas). The compiled files can then be
.IR load ed
instead of the sources to gain efficiency.

.TP
.BI "\-o " outputfile
Specifies the output file or directory for the compilation of the last
specified
.IR lispfile .

.TP
.B \-l
A bytecode listing (*.lis) of the files being compiled will be produced.
Useful only for debugging purposes. See the documentation of
.I "compile-file"
for details.

.TP
.BI "\-x " expressions
Executes a series of arbitrary expressions instead of a read-eval-print loop.
The values of the expressions will be output to standard output.
Due to the argument processing done by the shell, the
.I expressions
must be enclosed in double quotes, and double quotes and backslashes must
be preceded by backslashes.

.TP
.IR "lispfile " "[" "argument ..." "]"
Loads and executes a
.IR lispfile .
There will be no read-eval-print loop. Before
.I lispfile
is loaded, the variable
.I "*args*"
will be bound to a list of strings, representing the
.IR argument s.
If
.I lispfile
is
.BR "\-" ,
the standard input is used instead of a file.
If
.I lispfile
is an empty string
.B "",
the rest of the arguments is still available in
.I "*args*",
for parsing by the
.B "init-function"
of the current image.
This option must be the last one. No RC file will be executed.



.PP
.SH REFERENCE
The language implemented mostly conforms to
.RS 1
      ANSI Common Lisp standard X3.226\-1994
      http://www.x3.org/tc_home/j13sd4.htm
.RE
available online as the
.RS 1
      Common Lisp HyperSpec
      http://www.lisp.org/HyperSpec/
      ("CLHS" for short)
.RE
which supersedes the earlier specifications
.RS 1
      Guy L. Steele Jr.: Common Lisp \- The Language.
      Digital Press. 2nd edition 1990, 1032 pages.
      http://www.cs.cmu.edu/afs/cs.cmu.edu/project/ai-repository/ai/html/cltl/cltl2.html
      ("CLtL2" for short)
.RE
and
.RS 1
      Guy L. Steele Jr.: Common Lisp \- The Language.
      Digital Press. 1st edition 1984, 465 pages.
      ("CLtL1" for short)
.RE


.SH USE

.TP
.B help
to get some on-line help.

.TP
.BI "(apropos " name ")"
lists the symbols relating to
.IR name .

.TP
.BR "(exit)" " or " "(quit)" " or " "(bye)"
to quit
.BR clisp .




.SH FILES


.TP
main executable

.TP
.I lispinit.mem
initial memory image

.TP
.I config.lisp
site-dependent configuration

.TP
.I *.lisp
lisp source

.TP
.I *.fas
lisp code, compiled by
.B clisp

.TP
.I *.lib
lisp source library information, generated and used by the
.B clisp
compiler when compiling
.B require
forms

.TP
.I *.c
C code, compiled from lisp source by
.B clisp
for the FFI


.SH ENVIRONMENT

.TP
.B CLISP_LANGUAGE
specifies the language
.B clisp
uses to communicate with the user. The value may be
.BR english ", " german ", " french ", " spanish ", " dutch ", " russian
and defaults to
.BR english .
The
.B \-L
option can be used to override this environment variable.


.TP
.B LC_CTYPE
specifies the locale which determines the character set in use.
The value can be of the form
.IR language " or " language_country " or " language_country.charset ,
where
.I language
is a two-letter ISO 639 language code (lower case), and
.I country
is a two-letter ISO 3166 country code (upper case).
.I charset
is an optional character set specification, and needs normally not be given
because the character set can be inferred from the language and country.

.TP
.B LANG
specifies the language
.B clisp
uses to communicate with the user, unless it is already specified through
the environment variable
.B CLISP_LANGUAGE
or the
.B \-L
option.
It also specifies the locale determining the character set in use, unless
already specified through the environment variable
.BR LC_CTYPE .
The value may begin with a two-letter ISO 639 language code, for example
.BR en ", " de ", " fr .







.SH "SEE ALSO"

impnotes.html,
.IR cmucl (1),
.IR emacs (1),
.IR xemacs (1).

.SH BUGS

.PP
When you encounter a bug in
.B clisp
, please report it to the mailing list (see
.IR http://lists.sf.net/lists/listinfo/clisp-list
) or the SourceForge bug tracker (see
.IR http://sf.net/tracker/?func=add&group_id=1355&atid=101355
).

.PP
When submitting a bug report, please specify the following information:

.PP
1. What is your platform? (
.B 'uname -a'
on a Unix system) compiler version?  libc (on Linux)?

.PP
2. Where did you get the sources?  When?
(Absolute dates are preferred over the relative ones)

.PP
3. How did you build
.B clisp
? (What command, options etc.)
Please do a clean build (remove your build directory and build
.BB clisp
with
.B './configure --build build'
or at least do a
.B 'make distclean'
before
.B 'make'
). If you are reporting a crash (segmentation fault, bus error, core
dump etc), please do
.B './configure --with-debug --build build-g'
and report the backtrace.

.PP
4. If you are using pre-built binaries, the problem is likely
to be in the incompatibilities between the platform on which
the binary was built and yours; please try compiling the sources.

.PP
5. What is the output of
.B 'clisp --version'
?

.PP
6. Please supply the full output (copy and paste) of all the error
messages, as well as detailed instructions on how to reproduce them.

.PP
Known bugs, some of which may be platform-dependent, include


.PP
Not all extensions from CLtL2 are supported.

.PP
No on-line documentation beyond
.I apropos
and
.I describe
is available.




.SH PROJECTS

.PP
Writing on-line documentation.

.PP
Enhance the compiler so that it can inline local functions.

.PP
Specify a portable set of window and graphics operations.


.SH AUTHORS

Bruno Haible and Michael Stoll.
See file
.B COPYRIGHT
for the list of the other contributors and the license.
